
    the heifer, lamb, and nanny-goat were neighbours,
         with a huge lion living close at hand,
    they shared the gains and losses of their labours
         (all this was long ago, you understand).
    one day a stag was taken as their sport
         the goat, who snared him, was of course enraptured,
    and sent for all the partners of her toil,
         in order to divide the treasure captured.
    they came. the lion, counting on his claws,
         quartered the prey, and thus addressed the trio

    the parts are four. i take the first, because
         i am your monarch, and my name is leo.
    being the strongest, i annex the second
         as bravest, i can claim another share,
    should any touch the fourth, or say i reckoned
         unjustly, i shall kill him. so beware.

    said jupiter one day, let all that breathe
    come and obeisance make before my throne.
    if at his shape or being any grieve,
    let them cast fears aside. i'll hear their groan.
    come, monkey, you be first to speak. you see
    of animals this goodly company
    compare their beauties with your own.
    are you content? why not? good gracious me!
         the monkey said,
         no whit afraid .
    why not content? i have four feet like others,
    my portrait no one sneers at .do they, brothers?
    but cousin bruins hurriedly sketched in,
    and no one holds his likeness worth a pin.
    then came the bear. one thought he would have found
    something to grumble at. grumble! no, not he.
    he praised his form and shape, but, looking round,
    turned critic on the want of symmetry
    of the huge shapeless elephant, whose ears
    were much too long his tail too short, he fears.
         the elephant was next.
         though wise, yet sadly vexed
    to see good madam whale, to his surprise,
    a cumbrous mountain of such hideous size.
    quick mrs. ant thinks the gnat far too small,
    herself colossal. jove dismisses all,
    severe on others, with themselves content.
    'mong all the fools who that day homeward went,
    our race was far the worst. our wisest souls
    lynxes to others', to their own faults moles.
    pardon at home they give, to others grace deny,
    and keep on neighbours' sins a sleepless eye.
         jove made us so,
         as we all know,
    we wear our wallets in the self-same way .
    this current year, as in the bye-gone day.
    in pouch behind our own defects we store,
    the faults of others in the one before.

    a  swallow, in his travels o'er the earth,
         into the law of storms had gained a peep
    could prophesy them long before their birth,
         and warn in time the ploughmen of the deep.
    just as the month for sowing hemp came round,
         the swallow called the smaller birds together.
    yon' hand said he, which strews along the ground
         that fatal grain, forbodes no friendly weather.
    the day will come, and very soon, perhaps,
         when yonder crop will help in your undoing .

    when, in the shape of snares and cruel traps,
         will burst the tempest which to-day is brewing.
    be wise, and eat the hemp up now or never
         take my advice. but no, the little birds,
    who thought themselves, no doubt, immensely clever,
         laughed loudly at the swallow's warning words.
    soon after, when the hemp grew green and tall,
         he begged the birds to tear it into tatters.
    prophet of ill they answered one and all,
         cease chattering about such paltry matters.
    the hemp at length was ripe, and then the swallow,
         remarking that ill weeds were never slow
    continued though it's now too late to follow
         the good advice i gave you long ago,
    you still may manage to preserve your lives
         by giving credit to the voice of reason.
    remain at home, i beg you, with your wives,
         and shun the perils of the coming season.
    you cannot cross the desert or the seas,
         to settle down in distant habitations
    make nests, then, in the walls, and there, at ease,
         defy mankind and all its machinations.
    they scorned his warnings, as in troy of old
         men scorned the lessons that cassandra taught.
    and shortly, as the swallow had foretold,
         great numbers of them in the traps were caught.

    to instincts not our own we give no credit,
    and till misfortune comes, we never dread it.

    a house was built by socrates,
    that failed the public taste to please.
    one thought the inside, not to tell a lie,
    unworthy of the wise man's dignity.
    another blamed the front and one and all
    agreed the rooms were very much too small.
    what! such a house for our great sage,
    the pride and wonder of the age!
    would heaven said he, quite weary of the babel,
        was only able.
    small as it is, to fill it with true friends.
    and here the story ends.

    just reason had good socrates
    to find his house too large for these.
    each man you meet as friend, your hand will claim
    fool, if you trust the proffers that such bring.
    there's nothing commoner than friendship's name
    there's nothing rarer than the thing.

    a sly old fox, a foe of geese and rabbits,
    was taken captive in a trap one day
    (just recompense of predatory habits),
    and lost his tail before he got away.
    he felt ashamed at such a mutilation
    but, cunning as before, proposed a way
    to gain companions in his degradation
    and spoke as follows, on a council-day.
    dear brother foxes, what can be the beauty
    or use of things so cumbrous and absurd?
    they only sweep the mud up. it's your duty
    to cut them off it is, upon my word!
    not bad advice. there may be wisdom in it
    remarked a sage, but will you, by-the-by,
    oblige us all by turning round a minute,
    before we give a positive reply?
    you never heard such hurricanes of laughter
    as hailed the cropped appearance of the rogue.
    of course, among the foxes, ever after,
    long tails continued very much in vogue.

    an ass, with relics loaded, thought the crowd
    knelt down to him, and straightway grew so proud
    he took to his own merit, without qualms,
    even the incense and loud chaunted psalms,
    some one, to undeceive him, wisely said.
    a foolish vanity has turned your head.
    they not to you, but to the idol pray
    where glory's due, there they the honour pay.

    when foolish magistrates rule o'er a town,
    it's not the man we bow to, but his gown.

    a donkey donned a lion's hide,
    and spread a panic, far and wide
    (although the donkey, as a rule,
    is not a fighter, but a fool).
    by chance, a little bit of ear
    stuck forth, and made the matter clear.
    then hodge, not relishing the trick,
    paid off its author with a stick.
    while those who saw the lion's skin,
    but little dreamed who lurked within,
    stood open-mouthed, and all aghast,
    to see a lion run so fast.

    this tale applies, unless i err,
    to many folks who make a stir
    and owe three-fourths of their success
    to servants, carriages, and dress.